ARROW-8023: [Website] Add blog post about the C data interface (#50)
apache/arrow-site: _posts/2020-04-xx-introducing-arrow-c-data-interface.md

the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

Apache Arrow includes a cross-language, platform-independent in-memory
columnar format allowing zero-copy data sharing and transfer between
heterogenous runtimes and applications.

The easiest way to use the Arrow columnar format has always been to depend
on one of the concrete implementations developed by the Apache Arrow community.
The project codebase contains libraries for 11 different programming languages
so far, and will likely grow to include more languages in the future.

However, some projects may wish to import and export the Arrow columnar format
without taking on a new library dependency, such as the Arrow C++ library.
We have therefore designed an alternative which exchanges data at the C level,

> conforming to a simple data definition.  The C ABI is a platform-wide standard
> that is unlikely to change (and practically never changes), because it ensures
> portability of libraries and executable binaries.  Two libraries that utilize

Reviewer: ```suggestion
conforming to a simple data definition.  The C data interface carries no dependencies
except a shared C ABI between binaries which use it.  C ABIs are platform-wide standards
which are necessarily adhered to by all compilers which generate binaries and are extremely
stable, ensuring portability of libraries and executable binaries.  Two libraries that utilize
```

the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

Apache Arrow includes a cross-language, platform-independent in-memory
columnar format allowing zero-copy data sharing and transfer between
heterogenous runtimes and applications.

The easiest way to use the Arrow columnar format has always been to depend
on one of the concrete implementations developed by the Apache Arrow community.
The project codebase contains libraries for 11 different programming languages
so far, and will likely grow to include more languages in the future.

However, some projects may wish to import and export the Arrow columnar format
without taking on a new library dependency, such as the Arrow C++ library.
We have therefore designed an alternative which exchanges data at the C level,

> conforming to a simple data definition.  The C data interface carries no dependencies

Author: ```suggestion
conforming to a simple data definition.  The C Data Interface carries no dependencies
```

---
layout: post
title: "Introducing the Apache Arrow C data interface"
description: "This post introduces the Arrow C data interface, a simple C-based
interoperability standard to simplify interactions between independent users
and implementors of the Arrow in-memory format."
date: "2020-04-02 00:00:00 +0100"
author: apitrou
categories: [application]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

> Apache Arrow is a cross-language, platform-independent in-memory format

Reviewer 2: "Apache Arrow **includes** a cross-language, platform-independent in-memory **columnar format**"

Reflecting expanding scope of the project. Still running into people who are surprised by the amount of software in the project. Therefore, we should be consistent about expressing things that the project "has" or "includes" versus what it "is" (to avoid some of these "project identity confusion" problems)

allowing zero-copy data sharing and transfer between heterogenous runtimes
and applications.

> The easiest way to benefit from the Arrow format has always been to depend

Reviewer 2: "to use the Arrow columnar format"

on one of the concrete implementations developed by the Apache Arrow community.

> There are 11 such implementations, each for a different language and ecosystem

Reviewer 2: Nit: maybe something like "The project codebase contains libraries for 11 different programming language so far and will likely grow to include more languages in the future."

(Java, C++, Python, Rust, R, Javascript, C#, Go...).

However, packaging and ABI issues in C++ can deter from depending on the

> Arrow C++ library.  We have therefore worked on an alternative, which

Reviewer 2: I'm concerned that this might read as too much of a "neg" of the C++ library.

How about this:

"Some projects may wish to import and export Arrow columnar data without taking on a new library dependency, such as the Arrow C++ library."

The packaging and ABI issues are somewhat distracting details -- people have many reasons for not wanting to take on dependencies -- if we list them here then it could be a distraction, e.g. "wait, what ABI issues?"

> involves exchanging data at the C level by conforming to a simple data

Reviewer 2: A potential rephrasing

"We therefore have designed a tiny (minimalist?) and portable C data structures that can be easily copied into a codebase and used to provide access to Arrow data at function call sites." (or similar)

definition.  The C ABI is a platform-wide standard that is unlikely to

> change (and practically never changes), because it ensures portability of

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a sentence to this paragraph like "Two libraries that utilize these C structures can do zero-copy data transfers at runtime without any build-time or link-time dependency requirements."

> libraries and executable binaries.

Author: No, I mean the platform's standard C ABI, e.g. how structs, floats, etc. are laid out on each platform. Perhaps there's a better wording to make that clear?

The best way to learn about the C Data Interface is to read the
[spec](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/CDataInterface.html).
However, we will quickly go over its strong points.

## Two simple struct definitions

> To interact with the C Data Interface from you C or C++ level, the only

Reviewer 2: "from you C or C++ level" -> "at the C or C++ level"

thing you have to include in your code is two struct type declarations
(and a couple of ``#define`` for constant values).  Those declarations
only depend on standard C types.  You can simply paste them in a header
file.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add a sentence about C FFI capabilities in languages like Rust, Python (cffi / cython), Go, Julia, etc.? To stave off the reaction of "but I'm not using C or C++". Most people should know that they can deal with C ABIs in their languages but just in case.

Author: Oh, yes, I should add that.

## Zero-copy data sharing

> The C Data Interface passes Arrow buffers through memory pointers.  So,

Reviewer 2: "Arrow data buffers" ?

by construction, it allows you to share or pass data from one runtime to
another without copying it.  Since the data is supposed to be in standard
[Arrow in-memory format](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html),
its layout is well-defined and unambiguous.

## Reduced marshalling

The C Data Interface stays close to the natural way of expressing Arrow-like
data in C or C++.  Only two aspects involve non-trivial marshalling:

* the encoding of data types, using a very simple string-based language
* the encoding of optional metadata, using a very simple length-prefixed format

## Separate type and data representation

> Some applications will produce many instances of data of a single datatype
> (for example, as a stream of record batches).  To allow those applications
> to reduce the overhead of datatype representation and reconstruction, the
> C Data Interface defines two independent structures: one representing a
> datatype (and optional metadata), one representing a piece of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For applications which produce many instances of data of a single datatype
(for example, as a stream of record batches), repeatedly reconstructing the
datatype from its string encoding would represent unnecessary overhead.  To
address this use case, the C Data Interface defines two independent structures:
one representing a datatype (and optional metadata), one representing a piece
of data.
```

## Lifetime handling

One common difficulty of data sharing between heterogenous runtimes is to

> correctly handle the lifetime of data.  The C Data Interface solves that issue
> by letting the data producer define a pointer to a release callback that the
> consumer must call when it has done using the data.  This way, the producer
> is free to define its memory management scheme.  For example, the Arrow C++
> library, when used as a producer, passes a release callback which simply
> decrements a `shared_ptr`'s reference count.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
correctly handle the lifetime of data.  The C Data Interface allows the producer
to define its own memory management scheme through a release callback.
This is a simple function pointer which consumers will call when they are
finished using the data.  For example when used as a producer the Arrow C++
library passes a release callback which simply decrements a `shared_ptr`'s
reference count.
```
